Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

R. Teal Witter * 1 Álvaro Parafita * 2 Tomàs Garriga 2 3 Maximilian Muschalik 4 Fabian Fumagalli 4
Axel Brando 2 Lucas Rosenblatt 5
Structural Causal Model (SCM)

arXiv:2602.07203v1 [cs.LG] 6 Feb 2026

Abstract

X1

Structural Causal Models (SCM) are a powerful
framework for describing complicated dynamics
across the natural sciences. A particularly elegant way of interpreting SCMs is do-Shapley, a
game-theoretic method of quantifying the average
effect of d variables across exponentially many
interventions. Like Shapley values, computing
do-Shapley values generally requires evaluating
exponentially many terms. The foundation of
our work is a reformulation of do-Shapley values in terms of the irreducible sets of the underlying SCM. Leveraging this insight, we can exactly compute do-Shapley values in time linear
in the number of irreducible sets r, which itself
can range from d to 2d depending on the graph
structure of the SCM. Since r is unknown a priori, we complement the exact algorithm with an
estimator that, like general Shapley value estimators, can be run with any query budget. As the
query budget approaches r, our estimators can
produce more accurate estimates than prior methods by several orders of magnitude, and, when the
budget reaches r, return the Shapley values up to
machine precision. Beyond computational speed,
we also reduce the identification burden: we prove
that non-parametric identifiability of do-Shapley
values requires only the identification of interventional effects for the d singleton coalitions, rather
than all classes.

X3
X4

X2

closure S = {X1, X2, X3, X4}

Y

basis S = {X3}

1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 4
1, 4

1, 2, 3
1, 2

1

1, 3, 4

1, 3

2, 3

2

3

2, 3, 4
2, 4

3, 4
4

Ø
Lattice of Coalitions

Figure 1. An example Structural Causal Model (SCM) and the
corresponding lattice of coalitions. Because of the graph structure,
intervening on some nodes is redundant. For example, setting
{X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 } has the same effect as setting {X3 } because
X3 blocks all directed paths from the other nodes to Y . For such a
class, we refer to its smallest coalition (e.g., {X3 }) as the basis,
and the largest coalition (e.g., {X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 }) as the closure.

cient due to the fundamental problem of causal inference:
because we cannot observe the counterfactual world where
a specific intervention did not occur, we cannot definitively
state, based on data alone, that one event caused another
(Holland, 1986; Rubin, 1974).
Structural Causal Models (SCMs) offer a powerful solution by explicitly modeling the underlying mechanisms of a
system (Pearl, 2009). Whether derived from established domain knowledge or learned via causal discovery algorithms
(Peters et al., 2017), SCMs formalize the data-generating
process: a directed acyclic graph G representing causal relationships, and a set of structural equations that determine
the value of each node as a function of its parents and exogenous noise (Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016). We provide a
more formal introduction to SCMs in Appendix B.

1. Introduction
The question of causality is crucial to scientific inquiry, ranging from policy evaluation in economics to treatment effects
in healthcare. Yet, observational data alone is often insuffi1
Mathematical Sciences Department, Claremont McKenna
College 2 Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
3
Novartis 4 LMU Munich, MCML 5 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, New York University. Correspondence to: R. Teal Witter <rtealwitter@cmc.edu>, Álvaro Parafita
<parafita.alvaro@gmail.com>.

With a fully specified SCM, we can rigorously evaluate the
effect of specific actions using the do-operator (Pearl, 2009).
This operator simulates an intervention where a subset of
variables is forced to take specific values, independent of

Preprint. February 10, 2026.

1

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Ask
High

Ask
Volume
Bid
High

Bid
Open

Bid
Volume
Ask
Open

Ask
Low

1.0

Est. (Normalized)

Bid
Close

0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0

RegressionMSR
doRegressionMSR

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

LeverageSHAP
doLeverageSHAP

1.0

0.5

True (Normalized)

0.0

0.5

1.0

Figure 2. Left: A learned SCM from a TALENT dataset. Nodes and edges represent the learned causal graph used to define the
interventional value function ν(S) = E[Y | do(S = xS )] for a fixed instance x. Right: Plots of estimated vs true do-Shapley
values on the learned SCM for randomly sampled x. Compared to the value-function-agnostic state-of-the-art RegressionMSR and
LeverageSHAP estimators, our doEstimator variants provide substantially more accurate do-Shapley value estimates.

their natural causes. Consider a specific instance of interest
x ∈ Rd . We define the value function ν(S) as the expected
value of the target outcome Y when the subset of features
S ⊆ [d] is intervened upon to match their observed values
in x:
ν(S) = E[Y | do(S = xS )].

Lee, 2017) or restrictive path-dependent permutations (Frye
et al., 2020), this metric strictly isolates the total causal effect of a feature intervention. This rigorous isolation allows
us to translate abstract model dynamics into concrete causal
attributions, such as statements like “High family income
increased acceptance probability by 10%” or “Prescribing
prednisone decreased reported pain by two marks.”

(1)

The challenge in computing the Shapley value, of course,
is that there are still 2d terms ν(S). So, without additional
structure in ν, exactly computing the Shapley value would
take exponential time. To address this, the standard approach is to approximate the Shapley value using stochastic estimators that evaluate ν(S) on a limited budget of
sampled coalitions. A diverse array of model-agnostic estimators has been developed for this purpose, including
direct Monte Carlo estimators (Štrumbelj & Kononenko,
2014), permutation-based sampling (Castro et al., 2009),
and regression-based formulations such as KernelSHAP
and LeverageSHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Covert &
Lee, 2021; Musco & Witter, 2025).

This formulation enables us to precisely answer hypothetical
queries, such as: “If we explicitly set this student’s income
and tutoring time, how would their probability of admission
change?” or “If a patient were administered prednisone
and made to stop smoking, what would be their expected
pain level?” However, characterizing the system’s behavior
purely through these individual queries is challenging. As
the number of features d grows, the number of possible
interventional subsets scales as 2d . To extract interpretable
insights from this combinatorial landscape, we need a unified framework to attribute the complicated dynamics of the
SCM to individual features.
The Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) provides a rigorous
framework for such explanations by attributing the changes
in the outcome Y to individual variables based on their
marginal contributions. Formally, the ith Shapley value captures the weighted average effect of adding variable i to a
coalition S:
X
ϕi =
[ν(S ∪ i) − ν(S)]p|S|
(2)

For do-Shapley values, recent work has exploited the observation that the topological structure of SCMs often renders
specific interventions redundant (Parafita et al., 2025). For
example, in the causal graph depicted in Figure 1, the intervention on {X3 } results in the same value as the intervention
on {X1 , X3 , X4 }, because the paths from X1 and X2 to Y
are blocked by X3 . To formalize this, define the basis of a
coalition S as the subset S ⊆ S containing precisely those
variables j ∈ S that possess a directed path to Y that does
not traverse any other node in S. In effect, any variable in
S \ S is intercepted by S and yields no additional impact
on the outcome, ensuring ν(S) = ν(S). A set is irreducible
if it is its own basis. This property enables a caching strategy: rather than naively evaluating the SCM for every query
ν(S), the estimator first computes the basis S and checks

S⊆[d]\i

−1
where the weight pℓ = d1 d−1
can be interpreted as a
ℓ
probability distribution.
When the value function is defined via the interventional dooperator (Equation 1), the result is the do-Shapley value
(Jung et al., 2022), also referred to as the causal Shapley value (Heskes et al., 2020).1 Unlike standard formulations that rely on conditional expectations (Lundberg &
1

simply as the value function, and the do-Shapley value as the
Shapley value.

For conciseness, we henceforth refer to the do-value function

2

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

if ν(S) has been previously memoized. If so, the cached
value is returned; if not, the SCM is evaluated and the result
stored. This mechanism avoids redundant evaluations of
the underlying model, resulting in significant computational
speedups (Parafita et al., 2025).

1

1

d

(b) Since there are 2d sets total, there are at most 2d irreducible
sets. The figure depicts a graph with 2d irreducible sets.
Figure 3. The number of irreducible sets ranges between d and 2d .

proaches is sample redundancy. Standard estimators sample coalitions without knowledge of the underlying causal
structure, meaning they can (wastefully) query different
coalitions that belong to the same large equivalence class.
Thus, a budget of m queries often produces far fewer than m
unique values. We resolve this inefficiency by introducing a
boundary sampler, a targeted exploration strategy guaranteed to identify min(m, r) distinct equivalence classes when
run with m queries. By feeding these distinct values into a
simulated estimator, we maximize the information extracted
from the available budget. We find that this method can
reduce estimation error by orders of magnitude compared
to the best value-function-agnostic estimators run with the
caching scheme of Parafita et al. (2025). Furthermore, the
estimator exhibits seamless convergence: as the budget m
approaches r, the approximation error vanishes, achieving
exact computation (up to machine precision) once m ≥ r.

(3)

j=1

where the class weight wi (cj ) is derived in Equation 5. A
similar decomposition is known for trees (Zern et al., 2023b;
Witter et al., 2025); but, unlike trees where the structure can
be read in a linear pass of the leaves, efficiently finding the
class structure of an SCM is non-trivial.
This formulation reduces the exact computation of Shapley
values to a sum over r terms. To identify these classes
efficiently, we propose a lattice exploration algorithm that
circumvents the exhaustive enumeration of the powerset.
Leveraging a structural property of closed sets (Lemma 3.1),
our algorithm enumerates all r classes in O(r(d + e + T ))
time, where e is the number of edges in the causal graph
and T is the time to query the value function once.

In practice, SCMs are frequently learned from observational
data and a hypothesized graph structure. A critical prerequisite for this process is identifiability: determining whether a
causal query can be uniquely estimated from the observed

The efficiency of this approach is strictly governed by the
underlying graph topology. As illustrated in Figure 3, the
number of classes r varies with the graph structure, ranging
from a linear d in the best case to 2d in the worst case.

Number of Classes r

105

To quantify how much this compression manifests in practice, we plot the number of irreducible sets r against the
number of variables d across real datasets in Figure 4. The
observed scaling typically lies below the worst-case 2d , reflecting the sparsity of learned causal graphs in real-world
tabular domains.
Although our exact algorithm scales linearly with r, the
number of classes r is unknown a priori. Since real-world
applications demand strict resource limits, we must often
operate within a fixed computational budget of m value
function queries. To address this, we propose a class of
estimators explicitly tailored to this constrained setting.

70

Observed (r)
Exhaustive (2d)
Linear Lower Bound (d)

104

60

Number of Edges |E|

ν(cj )wi (cj )

···

2

Y

Crucially, these classes constitute a partition of the powerset
of all d features. Letting r denote the total number of such
classes c1 , . . . , cr , we leverage this structure to compress
the Shapley summation into a linear combination of class
values:
r
X

Y

d

(a) Since there is a directed path from each node to Y , there
are at least d irreducible sets. The figure depicts a graph with
d irreducible sets.

We extend this insight by observing that every basis S is
associated with a unique closure S̄ ⊇ S—the maximal
coalition such that intervening on S̄ yields the identical
effect as intervening on S. For example, the closure of
{X3 } in Figure 1 is {X1 , X2 , X3 , X4 }. Together, these
bounds define an equivalence class of coalitions {S ⊆ [d] :
S ⊆ S ⊆ S̄}, all of which map to the same value ν(S).

ϕi =

···

2

50
103

40

102

30
20

101

10
2

4

6

8

10

12

Dimension d (Nodes)

14

16

Figure 4. Complexity Reduction. The number of irreducible sets
r (colored points) versus the dimension d. While the theoretical
worst-case complexity is 2d (red dashed line), real-world causal
structures are often sparse, resulting in r scaling in between the
exponential and the linear lower bound d (black dotted line).

The fundamental limitation of prior caching-based ap3

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

probability distribution given the graph (Pearl, 2009). For
instance, in the presence of unobserved confounding, different structural parameters could yield the exact same observational distribution but different interventional outcomes.
The gold standard for verifying non-parametric identifiability is the ID algorithm (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006; Tian &
Pearl, 2002), which determines if a specific query ν(S) is
computable from the observational distribution.

1997), capturing the joint causal impact of coalitions.
1.1. Additional Related Work
Exactly computing Shapley values is generally feasible only
when the underlying model possesses exploitable structure
(Rozemberczki et al., 2022). This has led to efficient, modelspecific algorithms for decision trees and ensembles, including TreeSHAP (Lundberg et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022),
interventional variants (Zern et al., 2023b), and extensions
like TreeSHAP-IQ (Muschalik et al., 2024c). Similar exact
methods exist for linear models (Štrumbelj & Kononenko,
2014), product-kernel networks (Mohammadi et al., 2025a),
Gaussian processes (Mohammadi et al., 2025b), graph neural networks (Muschalik et al., 2025), and KNN-based data
valuation (Jia et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023; 2024). When
black-box access precludes exact methods, practitioners rely
on model-agnostic estimators (Chen et al., 2023; Muschalik
et al., 2024b) such as Monte Carlo sampling (Castro et al.,
2009; Kolpaczki et al., 2024b;a; Fumagalli et al., 2023;
Wang & Jia, 2023) or regression-based approaches like
KernelSHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), which has been
enhanced via leverage scores (Musco & Witter, 2025) and
interaction support (Fumagalli et al., 2024; Tsai et al., 2023).
Finally, exact computation has recently merged with estimation via surrogate modeling (Butler et al., 2025), where
auxiliary models are fit to the value function to allow efficient extraction of Shapley values (Witter et al., 2025).

This creates a practical bottleneck for Shapley value estimation. Since the Shapley value aggregates r terms, a
practitioner using prior methods would be forced to run
the estimator and iteratively check identifiability for each
irreducible set encountered. If a single coalition proved
unidentifiable, the entire estimation would be invalidated after significant computation (Parafita et al., 2025). In Section
5, we resolve this burden by proving a structural sufficiency
theorem: to guarantee the identifiability of all 2d coalitions,
it suffices to verify identifiability for only the d singleton
interventions {i} ⊂ [d]. This allows practitioners to run a
rapid, O(d) sanity check before model training begins, ensuring that the resulting Shapley values will be valid without
the risk of costly mid-computation failures.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold:
1. Exact Computation via Irreducible Sets: We propose
an algorithm that computes exact do-Shapley values by
exploiting the graph’s equivalence classes. By traversing
the lattice of closed sets, the algorithm runs in time linear
in the number of irreducible sets r (and the graph size e),
rather than the worst-case exponential complexity of 2d .

2. Reformulating do-Shapley Values
In this section, we leverage the underlying structure of an
SCM to reformulate do-Shapley values in terms of equivalence classes.

2. Structure-Aware Estimation: We introduce a class of
boundary sampling estimators designed for fixed-budget
settings. Unlike prior methods that sample blindly, our approach targets distinct equivalence classes. This yields error
reductions of several orders of magnitude as m approaches
r, and seamlessly transitions to exact machine-precision
computation once the budget satisfies m ≥ r.

Firstly, we will assume that all nodes in [d] are ancestors of
the target node Y , since non-ancestors have null do-Shapley
value. We will start with the definition of basis, derived
from the concept of irreducible sets in Parafita et al. (2025).
Definition 2.1 (Basis). The basis of S, denoted S, is the
subset of nodes j ∈ S such that there exists a directed path
from j to Y that intersects S only at j.

3. Efficient Identifiability Check: We prove that nonparametric identifiability of the full do-Shapley value is
guaranteed if and only if the d singleton interventions are
non-parametrically identifiable. This result enables a rapid
O(d) sanity check, allowing practitioners to verify the feasibility of the explanation task before incurring the cost of
model training or estimation.

A set S ⊆ [d] is irreducible if it is its own basis.
Similarly, we will define the closure of S as the superset of
nodes that can be blocked from reaching Y by S.

While we focus on the Shapley value due to its
widespread adoption, our theoretical insights generalize to
the broader class of probabilistic values—e.g., Banzhaf values (Banzhaf III, 1964), beta Shapley values (Kwon & Zou,
2022), and weighted Banzhaf values (Li & Yu, 2024)—by
simply changing the marginal weights in Equation 4. Furthermore, in Section 7, we demonstrate how to adapt our
methods to compute Shapley Interaction Indices (Grabisch,

Definition 2.2 (Closure). The closure of S, denoted S̄, is
the set of all nodes j ∈ [d] such that every directed path
from j to Y intersects S.
We say a set S ⊆ [d] is closed if it is its own closure.
Let S and S̄ be the basis and closure of a coalition S, respectively. S belongs to an equivalence class with all T
such that S ⊆ T ⊆ S̄. By definition, all nodes in T \ S
4

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 1 FindClass

are blocked from reaching Y by S, so, by the third rule of
do-Calculus (Pearl, 2009),

Input: Set S ⊆ [d], graph G
Output: basis S ⊆ S, and closure S̄ ⊇ S
G′ ← G with all incoming edges to nodes in S removed
Nanc ← ancestor nodes i.e., a directed path to Y in G′
S̄ ← S ∪ ([d] \ Nanc ) ▷ S and nodes not connected to Y
S ← S ∩ Nanc
▷ Subset of S still connected to Y
return S, S̄

ν(S) = ν(T ) = ν(S̄).
It is easy to see that the classes form a partition of all 2d
coalitions.
Let r be the number of irreducible sets, and denote the
classes by c1 , . . . , cr . In an abuse of notation, we will define
ν(cj ) = ν(S) where S is any set in class cj . We will use
this structure to rewrite the Shapley values:

ϕi =

X

there are 2d sets on the lattice, so even constant work per
set is infeasible. Instead, we can efficiently traverse the
set lattice by only generating sets which are guaranteed to
be closed, amortizing the work to each class, rather than
each subset. The key tool is a structural lemma on alternate
definitions of closed sets.

p|S| [ν(S ∪ {i}) − ν(S)]

S⊆[d]\{i}

=

X



ν(S) 1[i ∈ S]p|S|−1 − 1[i ∈
/ S]p|S|

Lemma 3.1. Let S̄ ⊂ [d] be a closed set with basis S. Then

S⊆[d]

=

r
X

ν(cj ) · wi (cj )

1. For all j ∈ S, S̄ \ {j} is closed.

(4)

2. If S̄ ̸= [d], there exists j ∈ [d] \ S̄ so that S̄ ∪ {j} is
closed and j is in the basis of S̄ ∪ {j}.

j=1

where, with S̄ as the closure of class c and S as the basis of
class c, we define
X 

wi (c) =
1[i ∈ T ]p|T |−1 − 1[i ∈/ T ]p|T | .

We defer the proof of the lemma to Appendix A.
Algorithm 2 describes our method. We efficiently find each
class by iterating over closed sets, in decreasing order of
size. We start with the full set [d]. For each closed set S̄ of
size ℓ, we compute its basis S. By Lemma 3.1, S̄ \ {j} is
closed for all j ∈ S. We then add each of these closed sets,
and further explore them when we reach size ℓ − 1.

T :S⊆T ⊆S̄

Even though there could be exponentially many subsets in a
class, we can compute wi (c) in O(d) time. In particular, it
is easy to show that

P

|S̄|

pℓ−1 |S̄|−|S|
i∈S

ℓ=|S|

ℓ−|S|




P S̄|
wi (c) = − |ℓ=|S|
pℓ |S̄|−|S|
i∈
/ S̄
ℓ−|S|





0
else.

We can see that Algorithm 2 correctly returns all closed sets
by an inductive argument. Suppose that we have identified
all closed sets of size ℓ; the base case is trivial since there
is only one set, and it must be closed. By Lemma 3.1,
for every closed set S̄ of size ℓ − 1, there is a closed set
S̄ ∪ {j} for some j in the basis of S̄ ∪ {j}. By the inductive
assumption, we must have identified this set, and also found
S̄ by removing j from S̄ ∪ {j}. It follows that every closed
set of size ℓ − 1 gets generated by some closed set of size ℓ.

(5)

We will use this structure to compute Shapley values. If
we have O(r(d + e)) time, then we can exactly compute
Shapley values as described in Section 3. Since r is initially
unknown, we may also want to estimate Shapley values
given a fixed query budget m. In Section 4, we describe
estimators that run in O(m(d + e)) time.

Algorithm 2 AllClasses
Input: Number of elements d, graph G
Output: All closed sets C
C0 ← . . . ← Cd ← ∅
▷ Closed sets of each size
Cd ← {{1, . . . , d}}
▷ Only closed set of size d
for ℓ = d, . . . , 1 do
for S̄ ∈ Cℓ do
S, S̄ ← FindClass(S̄, G)
▷ Use Lemma 3.1
for j ∈ S do
Add S̄ \ {j} to Cℓ−1
return C0 ∪ . . . ∪ Cd

3. Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values
By Equation 4, computing all irreducible sets is sufficient
to exactly compute the Shapley value. It remains to find all
irreducible sets.
A naive strategy is to traverse the set lattice by subset size,
determining the class of each set via Algorithm 1. Of course,
5

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 2 runs in O(r(d + e)) time: for each closure—
there is one closure for each of the r classes—the algorithm
runs a graph exploration in time d + e, and then adds at most
d closed sets of size ℓ − 1 to explore.

sample classes proportional to their weights wi (cj ) because
the classes (and thus their weights) are unknown without
graph exploration. Furthermore, a stratified sampling approach—sampling coalitions without replacement to ensure
unique classes—proves computationally expensive. As detailed in Appendix D, such a stratified sampling method
incurs a cost quadratic in m, which defeats the purpose of
fast approximation.

Simple Class Optimization Sometimes running Algorithm 1 as a subroutine in Algorithm 2 can be avoided. For
a closed set S̄ that is simple—S̄ is both its own closure and
basis—all of its subsets are also simple. To see why, observe
that all nodes j ∈ S̄ have a directed path to Y that does not
intersect any other node in S̄, and hence any other node in a
subset of S̄. It follows that all subsets are irreducible; with
Lemma 3.1, we have that all such subsets are also closed.
For a simple set, we add an optimization to Algorithm 2 in
our implementation so that all the bases of its candidates are
cached, avoiding the O(d + e) cost of Algorithm 1 for all
subsets of a simple set.

Boundary Sampling We propose a boundary sampler,
a targeted graph exploration strategy that achieves sample
efficiency in time linear in m. Instead of sampling blindly
from the powerset, we maintain candidate classes adjacent
to those we have already visited.
The algorithm, described in Algorithm 3, proceeds by maintaining a priority queue of candidate classes, ordered by
their expected weight magnitude Ei [|wi (c)|]. In each iteration, we sample a class c proportional to the expected
magnitude of its weight, evaluate ν(c), and add it to our
sampled set. We then expand the candidate by generating
the neighbors of c in the lattice. Specifically, for a class
c with basis S and closure S̄, the neighbors are defined as
either lower neighbors {S̄ \{j} | j ∈ S} or upper neighbors
{S̄ ∪{j} | j ∈
/ S̄}. For each neighbor, we run FindClass
to determine its canonical representation and weight, adding
it to the queue if it has not been seen. This ensures that
every query results in a new class. By starting at each level
in the lattice, and adding neighbors above and below, we
explore the lattice in a balanced way.

Together, Equation 4 and Algorithm 2 can compute Shapley
values in time linear in r.
Proposition 3.2. Shapley values of the intervention value
function can be exactly computed in O(r(d + e + T )) time,
where T is the time to evaluate the game ν on a given
coalition, and r is the number of irreducible sets.

4. Approximating do-Shapley Values
While Algorithm 2 allows for exact computation in O(r(d +
e)) time, the number of irreducible sets r is unknown a
priori. In resource constrained settings where r may be
too large, we would like an approximation technique that
operates within a fixed computational budget of m value
function queries.

We state Algorithm 3, and prove the following upper bound
on its runtime, in Appendix A.
Proposition 4.1. Algorithm 4 runs in O(m · d(d + e)) time,
where m is the query budget, d is the number of features,
and e is the number of edges in the graph.

Standard value-function-agnostic estimators sample coalitions from a fixed distribution. While caching can prevent
re-evaluation of the SCM for known classes, these estimators suffer from sample redundancy: they blindly generate
coalitions that may belong to equivalence classes already
queried. As a result, a budget of m queries often yields far
fewer than m distinct class values, wasting computational
resources on redundant parts of the lattice.

Estimation via Simulation After running the boundary
sampler, we utilize the set of sampled classes C to compute
the Shapley values, as shown in Algorithm 3.
Case m ≥ r: If the queue empties before the budget is
reached, we have identified all irreducible sets. We proceed
to compute the exact Shapley values using Equation 6.

To address this, we seek an estimator that guarantees the
discovery of min(m, r) distinct equivalence classes. If m ≥
r, the method should naturally recover the exact Shapley
values to machine precision. If m < r, it should prioritize
classes with weight to minimize estimation error.

Case m < r: We leverage the fact that we have paid the
cost to evaluate ν(c) for all c ∈ C. We construct a simulated
estimator, described in Appendix C. This allows us to generate many samples at no additional query cost, reducing the
variance of the estimator while balancing time complexity.

Recall that the Shapley value can be expressed as a weighted
sum over equivalence classes:
ϕi =

r
X

ν(cj ) · wi (cj ).

We run Algorithm 3 where the base estimators are the current state-of-the-art value-function-agnostic Shapley value
estimators LeverageSHAP (Musco & Witter, 2025) and
RegressionMSR (Witter et al., 2025).

(6)

j=1

Directly estimating this sum presents a challenge: we cannot
6

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 3 doEstimator

key questions: (1) To what extent does the number of irreducible sets r reduce the complexity compared to the worstcase 2d in real-world dependencies? (2) Do our structureaware estimators outperform state-of-the-art model-agnostic
baselines under fixed query budgets? (3) How does the
learned causal structure qualitatively influence feature attribution error?

Input: Budget m, Game v, BaseEstimator, Sampling multiplier k
Output: Shapley values estimates ϕ ∈ Rd
▷ Step 1: Sampling Phase
C, allSampled ← BoundarySampler(m, G)
Query ν(c) for all c ∈ C
▷ min(r, m) queries
▷ Step 2A: Exact Computation
if allSampled then
ϕ←0
for each class c ∈ C do
ϕi ← ϕi + ν(c) · wi (c) for all i
return ϕ
▷ Step 2B: Run BaseEstimator
D ← SimulatedSampler(C, k · m) ▷ Algorithm 5
return BaseEstimator(D)

Data. We utilize the TALENT benchmark (Liu et al., 2025),
a large-scale repository of tabular datasets. To enable reliable evaluation against exhaustive baselines, we restrict to
datasets whose post-pruning dimension (after restricting to
the ancestors of the target Y ) permits exact computation of
ν(S) over all coalitions S ⊆ [d] within our computational
budget. For each dataset, we select a set of test instances x
and report errors aggregated across instances and datasets.
Additional dataset-level details (including the resulting dimensions after pruning) are provided in the appendix.
SCM Generation. Since real-world datasets lack groundtruth causal graphs, we learn SCMs from data to serve as
the ground-truth games ν. For each dataset, we employ
the Greedy Relaxed Search Procedure (GRaSP) (Lam et al.,
2022) with a BIC score to learn a Completed Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (CPDAG), which is converted to a
DAG greedily. Not all features in a dataset causally influence the target. Following the definition of do-Shapley, we
prune the learned graph to the ancestral set of the target variable Y ; nodes with no directed path to Y have a null Shapley value and are removed. We then fit non-linear structural
equations using Gradient Boosting Regressors (Friedman,
2001) to model the conditional distributions E[Xi | Pa(Xi )].
This learned SCM acts as our oracle ν(S).

5. Identifiability
Whenever a causal query PS (T ) is uniquely determined
by the graph and dataset, we say the query is (nonparametrically) identifiable. However, this is not always
the case; we include an illustrative example in Appendix E.
Computing the do-Shapley value requires verifying the identifiability of component queries ν(S) via the ID algorithm
(Shpitser & Pearl, 2006). Even with class-based grouping,
this necessitates r separate tests. Conducting these checks
sequentially during estimation is risky, as a late discovery of
non-identifiability renders all prior computation wasted. To
eliminate this overhead, we present a theorem establishing
a linear-time check for global identifiability.

Methods. We evaluate our framework against two stateof-the-art model-agnostic estimators: RegressionMSR
(Witter et al., 2025) and LeverageSHAP (Musco & Witter, 2025). These serve as our structure-agnostic baselines, estimating Shapley values by directly sampling and
querying coalitions from the full powerset. To explicitly isolate the gains attributable to our graph-theoretic insights, our proposed estimators doRegressionMSR and
doLeverageSHAP are not fundamentally new regression
techniques. Rather, they repurpose the same estimation machinery used in the baselines. The main difference lies in
the data generation process: whereas the baselines query
random coalitions, our methods train the estimators on the
distinct equivalence classes recovered by the boundary sampler (as described in Algorithm 3). This allows us to compare “structure-aware” versus “structure-agnostic” sampling
while holding the estimation logic constant.

Theorem 5.1. The do-Shapley value ϕi is identifiable if,
and only if, ∀j ∈ [d], ν({j}) is identifiable.
The necessary background knowledge and proof is left for
Appendix E.
Consequently, we can execute the ID algorithm on the d
singleton coalition queries and, if all are identifiable, the
do-Shapley value will be identifiable and we can proceed
with its estimation. If not, further parametric assumptions,
or the inclusion of instrumental variables, will be required
to ensure identifiability. Regardless, this result prevents
practitioners from training estimating do-Shapley values
only to learn the outcome was not identifiable to begin
with. Additionally, it reduces the number of calls to the ID
algorithm from r to d.

6. Experiments
Lattice Complexity Reduction The efficiency of our exact algorithm relies on r ≪ 2d . In Figure 4, we plot the
number of irreducible sets r against the dimension d for 156

We evaluate the performance of our exact algorithm and
boundary sampling estimators on a diverse set of real-world
datasets. Our experiments are designed to investigate three
7

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values
do-Shapley values
(order 1)

Estimator Convergence (Aggregated)
10

−1

do-Shapley interactions
(order 2)

do-Shapley interactions
(order 7, Möbius Transform)

Relative MSE

10 −5
10 −9
10 −13

Method

10 −17

doRegressionMSR
doLeverageSHAP
RegressionMSR
LeverageSHAP
Budget = r

10 −21
10 −25

0.25

0.50

0.75

Expressivity

1.00

1.25

Budget Ratio m/r

1.50

1.75

2.00

Figure 6. Interactions offer an expressive explanation framework.

Figure 5. Estimator Convergence (Aggregated). The relative
MSE of Shapley value estimates versus the budget ratio m/r,
aggregated across all datasets. Shaded regions indicate 95% confidence intervals. Our structure-aware estimators consistently outperform the baseline variants. Notably, as the budget exceeds the
number of classes (m > r, red dotted line), our error vanishes to
machine precision, whereas baselines continue to exhibit variance.

b) The framework is not limited to single-feature attributions but naturally extends to interaction values, i.e.,
changes in the value function with respect to subsets T
rather than singletons i, as described in Appendix F.
While the Shapley values provides a principled framework
for attributing value to individuals, they are limited in expressivity. For instance, assessing interactions like synergies or
redundancies across multiple features, is not possible based
on individual Shapley values. n-Shapley values (Lundberg
et al., 2018b; Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023) enrich this explanation by adding interactions up to order n. These interactions are based on the Shapley interaction index (Grabisch
& Roubens, 1999), an axiomatic extension of the Shapley
value. Similar to the Shapley value, n-Shapley values satisfy
an extended efficiency axiom (Muschalik et al., 2024b), and
provide a more granular and expressive explanation of ν
(see Figure 6). Their explicit form is given in Appendix F.
With n = d, n-Shapley values yield the Möbius transform
(Rota, 1964), which provides the exact additive decomposition of ν (Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023). Importantly, they
satisfy the linearity axiom and their weights only depend on
the cardinality of the coalition and the interaction, which allows a similar decomposition as Equation (4). Consequently,
once the irreducible sets are known, we can efficiently compute the Shapley interaction index and n-Shapley values, as
shown in Appendix F.

datasets from the TALENT benchmark. We observe that
for real-world data, the number of irreducible sets r often
remains significantly below 2d .
Estimation Efficiency We evaluate estimation error by
query budget m, defined relative to the number of irreducible sets r. Figure 5 presents Relative MSE for all
estimators.
In the sparse budget regime where we cannot fully explore
the lattice, doRegressionMSR (blue) demonstrates superior sample efficiency, consistently achieving the lowest
error. This advantage becomes increasingly pronounced
as the budget approaches r. By prioritizing the discovery
of distinct equivalence classes via boundary sampling, our
method minimizes redundant queries that plague the standard samplers.
A phase transition occurs at m = r (indicated by the red vertical line). Once the budget allows for full lattice exploration,
our boundary sampler identifies that all irreducible sets have
been found. At this point, the algorithm switches to the exact
computation described in Section 3. Consequently, the MSE
for both doRegressionMSR and doLeverageSHAP
drops precipitously to machine precision. In contrast, the
structure-agnostic baselines (green and purple) continue to
sample coalitions with replacement, exhibiting a slow convergence rate and failing to achieve exactness even with
double the necessary budget (m = 2r).

Conclusion
We address the computational challenges of do-Shapley
values by reformulating the estimation via structural equivalence classes. Our proposed algorithm, based on irreducible
sets, scales with causal complexity (r) rather than dimension
(2d ) and employs boundary sampling to reduce redundancy.
Additionally, we show that verifying identifiability requires
only a linear O(d) check of singletons. By prioritizing
structure-aware exploration, this framework facilitates attribution in complex systems, offering a practical step toward
scalable causal explainability. Future work could extend
these methods to larger graphs, such as in genomics, or
investigate sensitivity to graph misspecification.

7. Generalizations
Our result immediately generalizes in two ways:
a) The weighting function p is not restricted to Shapley
values and may correspond to alternative probabilistic
value concepts, such as the Banzhaf index, weighted
Banzhaf values, or Beta Shapley values.
8

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Impact Statement

Behavior, 55(1):72–99, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.geb.2005.
03.002.

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of machine learning. There are many potential societal
consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.

Fumagalli, F., Muschalik, M., Kolpaczki, P., Hüllermeier,
E., and Hammer, B. SHAP-IQ: Unified Approximation of any-order Shapley Interactions. In Proceedings
of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2023.

References

Fumagalli, F., Muschalik, M., Kolpaczki, P., Hüllermeier,
E., and Hammer, B. KernelSHAP-IQ: Weighted Least
Square Optimization for Shapley Interactions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), pp. 14308–14342, 2024.

Banzhaf III, J. F. Weighted voting doesn’t work: A mathematical analysis. Rutgers Law Review, 19:317, 1964.
Bareinboim, E. and Pearl, J. Causal inference and the datafusion problem. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 113(27):7345–7352, 2016.

Grabisch, M. k-order additive discrete fuzzy measures
and their representation. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 92(2):
167–189, 1997. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0114(97)00168-1.

Bordt, S. and von Luxburg, U. From Shapley Values to
Generalized Additive Models and back. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 709–745, 2023.

Grabisch, M. and Roubens, M. An axiomatic approach to
the concept of interaction among players in cooperative
games. International Journal of Game Theory, 28(4):
547–565, 1999. doi: 10.1007/s001820050125.

Butler, L., Agarwal, A., Kang, J. S., Erginbas, Y. E., Yu,
B., and Ramchandran, K. Proxy-SPEX: Sample-efficient
interpretability via sparse feature interactions in LLMs.
In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=KI8qan2EA7.

Heskes, T., Sijben, E., Bucur, I. G., and Claassen, T. Causal
Shapley values: exploiting causal knowledge to explain
individual predictions of complex models. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:
4778–4789, 2020.

Castro, J., Gómez, D., and Tejada, J. Polynomial calculation
of the Shapley value based on sampling. Computers
& Operations Research, 36(5):1726–1730, 2009. doi:
10.1016/j.cor.2008.04.004.

Holland, P. W. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of
the American statistical Association, 81(396):945–960,
1986.

Chen, H., Covert, I. C., Lundberg, S. M., and Lee, S.-I.
Algorithms to estimate Shapley value feature attributions.
Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–12, 2023.

Jia, R., Dao, D., Wang, B., Hubis, F. A., Hynes, N., Gürel,
N. M., Li, B., Zhang, C., Song, D., and Spanos, C. J.
Towards efficient data valuation based on the shapley
value. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AIStats), pp.
1167–1176. PMLR, 2019.

Covert, I. and Lee, S.-I. Improving kernelshap: Practical shapley value estimation using linear regression. In
International conference on artificial intelligence and
statistics, pp. 3457–3465. PMLR, 2021.

Jung, Y., Kasiviswanathan, S., Tian, J., Janzing, D.,
Blöbaum, P., and Bareinboim, E. On measuring causal
contributions via do-interventions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10476–10501. PMLR,
2022.

Dubey, P., Neyman, A., and Weber, R. J. Value theory
without efficiency. Mathematics of Operations Research,
6(1):122–128, 1981. doi: 10.1287/MOOR.6.1.122.
Friedman, J. H. Greedy function approximation: A gradient
boosting machine. The Annals of Statistics, 29(5):1189–
1232, 2001. doi: 10.1214/aos/1013203451.

Kolpaczki, P., Bengs, V., Muschalik, M., and Hüllermeier,
E. Approximating the shapley value without marginal
contributions. In Proceeedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 13246–13255, 2024a.

Frye, C., Rowat, C., and Feige, I. Asymmetric Shapley values: incorporating causal knowledge into model-agnostic
explainability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33:1229–1239, 2020.

Kolpaczki, P., Muschalik, M., Fumagalli, F., Hammer, B.,
and Hüllermeier, E. SVARM-IQ: efficient approximation
of any-order shapley interactions through stratification. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 3520–3528,
2024b.

Fujimoto, K., Kojadinovic, I., and Marichal, J. Axiomatic characterizations of probabilistic and cardinalprobabilistic interaction indices. Games and Economic
9

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Kwon, Y. and Zou, J. Beta shapley: a unified and noisereduced data valuation framework for machine learning.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 8780–8802,
2022.

Muschalik, M., Fumagalli, F., Hammer, B., and Hüllermeier,
E. Beyond TreeSHAP: Efficient Computation of AnyOrder Shapley Interactions for Tree Ensembles. In Proceedings of the 38th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 14388–14396, 2024c.

Lam, W.-Y., Andrews, B., and Ramsey, J. Greedy relaxations of the sparsest permutation algorithm. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1052–1062. PMLR,
2022.

Muschalik, M., Fumagalli, F., Frazzetto, P., Strotherm, J.,
Hermes, L., Sperduti, A., Hüllermeier, E., and Hammer,
B. Exact Computation of Any-Order Shapley Interactions
for Graph Neural Networks. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

Li, W. and Yu, Y. Robust data valuation with weighted
banzhaf values. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Liu, S.-Y., Cai, H.-R., Zhou, Q.-L., Yin, H.-H., Zhou, T.,
Jiang, J.-P., and Ye, H.-J. Talent: A tabular analytics
and learning toolbox. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 26(226):1–16, 2025. URL http://jmlr.
org/papers/v26/25-0512.html.
Lundberg, S. M. and Lee, S.-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Musco, C. and Witter, R. T. Provably Accurate Shapley
Value Estimation via Leverage Score Sampling. In Proccedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
Parafita, Á. and Vitrià, J. Estimand-agnostic causal query
estimation with Deep Causal Graphs. IEEE Access, 10:
71370–71386, 2022.
Parafita, Á., Garriga, T., Brando, A., and Cazorla, F. J.
Practical do-shapley explanations with estimand-agnostic
causal inference. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=Qabko39AS5.

Lundberg, S. M., Erion, G. G., and Lee, S.-I. Consistent individualized feature attribution for tree ensembles. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.03888, 2018a.

Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2009.

Lundberg, S. M., Erion, G. G., and Lee, S.-I. Consistent individualized feature attribution for tree ensembles. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.03888, 2018b.

Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Elements of causal
inference: foundations and learning algorithms. The MIT
press, 2017.

Lundberg, S. M., Erion, G. G., Chen, H., DeGrave, A. J.,
Prutkin, J. M., Nair, B., Katz, R., Himmelfarb, J., Bansal,
N., and Lee, S. From local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for trees. Nature Machine
Intelligence, 2(1):56–67, 2020.

Rota, G.-C. On the foundations of combinatorial theory: I.
theory of möbius functions. In Classic Papers in Combinatorics, pp. 332–360. Springer, 1964.

Mohammadi, M., Chau, S. L., and Muandet, K. Computing exact shapley values in polynomial time for productkernel methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16516, 2025a.

Rozemberczki, B., Watson, L., Bayer, P., Yang, H., Kiss,
O., Nilsson, S., and Sarkar, R. The shapley value in
machine learning. In Proceedings of International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 5572–
5579, 2022.

Mohammadi, M., Muandet, K., Tiddi, I., Teije, A. T., and
Chau, S. L. Exact shapley attributions in quadratictime for fanova gaussian processes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.14499, 2025b.

Rubin, D. B. Estimating causal effects of treatments in
randomized and nonrandomized studies. Journal of educational Psychology, 66(5):688, 1974.

Muschalik, M., Baniecki, H., Fumagalli, F., Kolpaczki, P.,
Hammer, B., and Hüllermeier, E. shapiq: Shapley Interactions for Machine Learning. In Proceedings of Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
130324–130357, 2024a.

Shapley, L. A value for n-person games. In Contributions
to the Theory of Games (AM-28), Volume II, pp. 307–317.
Princeton University Press, 1953.

Muschalik, M., Baniecki, H., Fumagalli, F., Kolpaczki, P.,
Hammer, B., and Hüllermeier, E. shapiq: Shapley Interactions for Machine Learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37,
pp. 130324–130357, 2024b.

Shpitser, I. and Pearl, J. Identification of joint interventional
distributions in recursive semi-Markovian causal models.
In Proceedings of 21st National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1219–1226, Boston, MA, USA,
2006.
10

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Štrumbelj, E. and Kononenko, I. Explaining prediction models and individual predictions with feature contributions.
Knowledge and information systems, 41:647–665, 2014.
Tian, J. and Pearl, J. On the testable implications of causal
models with hidden variables. In Proceedings of the
18th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
(UAI), pp. 519–527, Edmonton, Canada, 2002.
Tsai, C., Yeh, C., and Ravikumar, P. Faith-Shap: The
Faithful Shapley Interaction Index. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 24(94):1–42, 2023.
Wang, J. T. and Jia, R. Data banzhaf: A robust data valuation
framework for machine learning. In Ruiz, F. J. R., Dy,
J. G., and van de Meent, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 6388–6421, 2023.
Wang, J. T., Zhu, Y., Wang, Y.-X., Jia, R., and Mittal, P. A
privacy-friendly approach to data valuation. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
volume 37, 2023.
Wang, J. T., Mittal, P., and Jia, R. Efficient data shapley for
weighted nearest neighbor algorithms. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AIStats), pp. 2557–2565. PMLR,
2024.
Witter, R. T., Liu, Y., and Musco, C. Regression-adjusted
monte carlo estimators for shapley values and probabilistic values. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=Qabko39AS5.
Yu, P., Bifet, A., Read, J., and Xu, C. Linear tree shap.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), volume 35, 2022.
Zern, A., Broelemann, K., and Kasneci, G. Interventional
SHAP values and interaction values for piecewise linear
regression trees. In Proceeedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 11164–11173,
2023a.
Zern, A., Broelemann, K., and Kasneci, G. Interventional
SHAP values and interaction values for piecewise linear
regression trees. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 11164–
11173, 2023b.

11

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

A. Delayed Proofs
Lemma 3.1 Let S̄ ⊂ [d] be a closed set with basis S. Then
1. For all j ∈ S, S̄ \ {j} is closed.
2. If S̄ ̸= [d], there exists j ∈ [d] \ S̄ so that S̄ ∪ {j} is closed and j is in the basis of S̄ ∪ {j}.
Proof of Lemma 3.1. We will first show that S̄ \ {j} is closed for all j ∈ S. To do so, it suffices to show that, for all nodes
not in S̄ \ {j}, there is a directed path to Y that does not intersect S̄ \ {j}. This is clearly true for all nodes not in S̄ since S̄
is itself closed. It must also be true for j since j ∈ S, i.e., there is a directed path from j to Y that does not intersect S. The
first statement follows.
Next, we will show that for S ̸= [d], there exists j ∈ [d] \ S̄ so that S̄ ∪ {j} is closed. Let T = [d] \ S̄. Since G is a finite
DAG, there is a topological order on the nodes. Consider a node j ∈ T with no ancestors in T , either because they are all in
S̄, or it has no ancestors. To prove that S̄ ∪ {j} is closed, it suffices to show that, for all nodes not in S̄ ∪ {j}, there is a
directed path to Y that does not intersect S̄ ∪ {j}. Since S̄ is closed, all of the nodes in T \ {j} have paths to Y that do
not intersect S̄. Note that j cannot be in any of these paths, since j has no ancestors in T , hence all nodes in T \ {j} must
actually have paths that do not intersect S̄ or j. Furthermore, since j ∈ T , it must have a directed path to Y that does not
intersect S̄. Therefore, j must be in the basis of S̄ ∪ {j}. The second statement follows.
Proposition 4.1. Algorithm 4 runs in O(m · d(d + e)) time, where m is the query budget, d is the number of features, and e
is the number of edges in the graph.
Proof of Proposition 4.1. The algorithm performs exactly m iterations of the main while loop. In each iteration, we
process one class c. The cost of processing a class is dominated by generating its neighbors and invoking FindClass for
each. A class with closure S̄ and basis S has |S| lower neighbors and d − |S̄| upper neighbors; thus, the total number of
neighbors is bounded by d. For each neighbor, we execute FindClass, which requires a graph traversal taking O(d + e)
time. Therefore, the work per iteration is O(d(d + e)). Over m iterations, the total time complexity is O(m · d(d + e)).
This is linear in the budget m, ensuring the method is scalable for anytime estimation.

12

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 4 BoundarySampler
Input: Budget m, Graph G
Output: Sampled classes C, flag allSampled
C←∅
Q←∅
Cseen ← ∅
▷ Helper to calculate weight and enqueue
function Enqueue(S)
c ← FindClass(S, G)
if c ∈ Cseen then
return
Add c to Cseen
Q[c] ← Ei [|wi (c)|] + ϵ
▷ Phase 1: Warm-start
for ℓ = 1 to d do
Sample random set S ⊂ [d] where |S| = ℓ
Enqueue(S)
▷ Phase 2: Weighted Graph Traversal
while |C| < m and Q ̸= ∅ do
Sample c from Q with prob ∝ Q[c]
Remove c from Q and add to C
S, S̄ ← basis and closure of c
Nbelow ← {S̄ \ {j} | j ∈ S}
Nabove ← {S̄ ∪ {j} | j ∈
/ S̄}
for candidate set S ′ ∈ Nbelow ∪ Nabove do
Enqueue(S ′ )
return C, Q == ∅

▷ Sampled classes
▷ Queue mapping classes to weights

▷ Get basis and closure

▷ Add ϵ to ensure valid dist.

13

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

B. Background on Structural Causal Models
A Causal graph is usually described as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) G, where every node represents a measured
random variable and every directed edge represents a relationship cause → effect. These graphs often include dashed
bidirected edges between pairs of nodes (X ↔ Y ) as a shorthand for the existence of an unobserved latent variable U that
acts as a confounder between them (X ← U → Y ). Additionally, it is assumed that every measured node X has a latent
exogenous noise variable, denoted EX , with the associated edge EX → X.
A Structural Causal Model (SCM) is a probabilistic model based on such a causal graph G with a probability distribution for
all latent nodes (i.e., all confounders and EX ) and, for each measured node X, functions fX such that X := fX (P aG (X)),
taking the values of all parents of X in G including latent variables. From this model, a probability distribution over
the measured variables V emerges, P (V ), as well as the intervened model Mdo(S=s) , where the do operator conveys an
intervention on all nodes X ∈ S replacing their functions fX by the assignment x := sX . This effectively removes all
incoming edges to the intervened nodes from the graph, and results in a new probability distribution for the intervened
model, P (V | do(S = s)), also denoted Ps (V ) or, for arbitrary intervention values, PS (V ).
Given a dataset and its assumed underlying causal structure, we can train an SCM following that graph to learn the
distribution of the dataset. Afterwards, one can employ procedures on the SCM to estimate causal queries of the form
PX (Y ). Additionally, if the causal query is non-parametrically identifiable (more details in Section 5), these estimations
resulting from the SCM are necessarily equivalent to what the true data generating process would return if we had access
to it. Therefore, we can employ these trained SCMs to estimate the do-SHAP value functions ν(S) as long as they are
identifiable. For more details about this approach, please refer to (Parafita & Vitrià, 2022).

14

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

C. Simulated Sampling from Irreducible Sets
In this appendix, we detail the SimulatedSampler, the engine behind Step 2B of the doEstimator. This component
allows us to sample coalitions efficiently from the specific sub-lattice defined by the discovered equivalence classes.
C.1. Algorithm and Explanation
The challenge in simulating samples from the discovered classes is that the union of these classes does not form a simple
structure (like a full powerset). A naive rejection sampling approach—sampling from the full powerset and keeping only
those in C—would be inefficient if the volume of C is small relative to 2d .
Instead, our sampler (Algorithm 5) adopts a constructive approach:
For each class c
• Normalization: We first calculate the total “volume” of available coalitions within the known classes.

with basis S and closure S̄, the number of subsets of size s contained in c is given by |S̄|−|S|
.
s−|S|
• Scale Calibration: Standard Shapley weights are defined for the entire powerset. To sample validly from our restricted
support, we solve for a scaling factor γ such that the expected number of samples drawn matches our target budget
Bsim . This is achieved via binary search (Lines 7-15).
• Stratified Generation: We iterate through each class c ∈ C and each valid subset size s. For each size, we compute the
expected number of samples Nc,s . We use probabilistic rounding to convert this expectation into an integer count, and
then generate that many unique subsets from class c using a combinatorial number system (Lines 22-26).
Algorithm 5 SimulatedSampler
1: Input: Discovered classes C, Simulation Budget Bsim , Weights w (per size)
2: Output: Dataset of coalitions D = {(Sk , ν(ck ), pk )}
3: D ← ∅
4: ▷ Step 1: Count available coalitions per size across all classes
5: Navail [s] ← 0 for s ∈ 0 . . . d
6: for each class c ∈ C do
7:
Let nfree = |S̄| − |S|
8:
for j = 0 to nfree do

9:
Navail [|S| + j] ← Navail [|S| + j] + njfree
10: ▷ Step 2: Calibrate sampling scale γ



Pd

γ wds , 1
(s)
12: Find γ ∗ via binary search such that E[samples](γ ∗ ) ≈ Bsim
13: ▷ Step 3: Constructive Sampling
14: for each class c ∈ C do
15:
Let Ifree be indices in S̄ \ S
16:
for j = 0 to |Ifree | do
17:
Size s ← |S| +j

11: Define E[samples](γ) =

s=0 Navail [s] · min

Prob p ← min γ ∗ wds , 1
()
 s
|Ifree |
19:
Count K ← j
20:
Expected count µ ← K · p
21:
Ndraw ← ⌊µ⌋ + Bernoulli(µ − ⌊µ⌋)
22:
if Ndraw > 0 then
23:
Generate Ndraw unique combinations Csub ⊆ Ifree of size j
24:
for each combination σ ∈ Csub do
25:
S ←S∪σ
26:
Add (S, ν(c), p) to D
27: return D
18:

15

▷ Probabilistic rounding

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

C.2. Runtime Analysis
Proposition C.1. The SimulatedSampler generates Nsim samples in O(Nsim · d + |C| · d) time.
Proof. The algorithm consists of three main parts:
1. Counting (O(|C| · d)): We iterate over each class once. For each class, we perform a loop over its ”free” size range,
which is at most d. The binomial coefficient calculations can be done in O(1) with pre-computation.
2. Calibration (O(d · log(1/ϵ))): The binary search evaluates the expected sample sum a constant number of times. Each
evaluation sums over d sizes.
3. Generation (O(Nsim · d)): The outer loops iterate over classes and sizes, but the inner generation logic (Lines 24-28)
executes exactly Nsim times in total (by definition of the calibrated budget). Generating a combination of size k using
the combinatorial number system or direct sampling takes O(d). Thus, the generation phase scales linearly with the
number of output samples.
Dominating terms yield a total complexity of O(Nsim · d + |C| · d), which is highly efficient given that no SCM evaluations
are performed.

16

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

D. Stratified Sampling
Ideally, to estimate the Shapley value for player i, we would sample each class c proportional to the magnitude of its weight
wi (c). However, the underlying class structure (the mapping of sets to values) is unknown prior to sampling, making the
direct computation of wi (c) impossible.
To address this, we consider an adaptive sampling scheme based on the natural distribution suggested by the Shapley weights.
We sample a set S containing i with probability pℓ−1 , and a set S excluding i with probability pℓ . Note that while these
probabilities are derived from the Shapley weights, they do not perfectly correspond to the final importance weights because
the contribution of i cancels to zero when i is effectively a “null” player (i.e., in the closure but not in the basis).
The proposed do-Good estimator samples according to these distributions without replacement. Sampling classes without
replacement is crucial for the estimator to achieve exactness when the sampling budget covers the effective support of the
game (m ≥ r). To achieve this, we maintain weighted counts of the remaining “mass” of the distributions for each player i.
We define the remaining mass for sets including i (µ(+) ) and excluding i (µ(−) ) as:
X
(+)
µℓ,i = pℓ−1
1[S not seen],
(7)
S:|S|=ℓ,i∈S
(−)
µℓ,i = pℓ

1[S not seen].

X

(8)

S:|S|=ℓ,i /
∈S


(+)
(−)
Initially, before any classes have been sampled, these initialize to the full binomial sums: µℓ,i = pℓ−1 d−1
ℓ−1 and µℓ,i =

pℓ d−1
ℓ .
Sampling Procedure
−
The sampling process proceeds hierarchically to determine whether to sample proportional to µ+
ℓ,i or µℓ,i :

1. We first select an index i uniformly from [d].
2. We sample an inclusion indicator z ∈ {−, +}, where
(+)
ℓ=1 µℓ,i
Pd−1 (−) .
(+)
ℓ=1 µℓ,i +
ℓ=0 µℓ,i

Pd

Pr(z = +) = Pd

(z)

3. We sample a set size ℓ with probability proportional to the remaining mass µℓ,i .
Once ℓ and z are determined, we must sample a specific set S of size ℓ (containing i if and only if z = +) uniformly from
the collection of all such sets that belong to currently unseen classes. This step is non-trivial; it depends on the number of
valid completions available in the unseen space. As detailed in Algorithm 7, computing these counts requires a linear pass
through the history of previously discovered classes.
We analyze the computational complexity of the ClassSampler (Algorithm 6). The runtime is dominated by the
requirement to sample uniformly from unseen sets, which necessitates checking consistency against all previously discovered
classes.
Proposition D.1 (Stratified Sampling Complexity). Let m be the sampling budget (number of iterations) and d be the
number of elements (dimension). Assuming set operations (union, intersection, subset checks) take O(d) time, the total time
complexity of the ClassSampler is O(m2 d2 ).
Because the algorithm is quadratic in m, we turn to the boundary sampling method described in Section 4.
Proof of Proposition D.1. The analysis proceeds by examining the cost of the helper functions from the bottom up.
1. Cost of CountSeen: This function iterates through the set of seen classes C. In the k-th iteration of the main loop,
|C| ≤ k. Inside the loop, we perform standard set operations (checking S ⊆ S ∪ R, etc.).
Tcount (k) = O(|C| · d) = O(k · d).
17

(9)

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 6 ClassSampler
Input: Number of elements d, budget m, value function ν, graph G
Output: Set of seen classes C
Initialize seen classesC ← ∅
(1)
Set µℓ,i ← pℓ−1 d−1
ℓ−1 for all ℓ ∈ {1, . . . , d} and i ∈ [d]

(0)
d−1
Set µℓ,i ← pℓ ℓ for all ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , d − 1} and i ∈ [d]
for idx = 1 to m do
▷ Sample set from unseen classes
Sample i ∼ Uniform([d])


(1)
ℓ=1 µℓ,i
(1) Pd−1 (0)
ℓ=1 µℓ,i +
ℓ=0 µℓ,i

Pd

Sample z ∼ Bernoulli

Pd

(z)

Sample ℓ ∝ µℓ,i
S ← {i} if z = 1 else ∅
S ← SampleUnseenBySize(ℓ, S, C)
S, S̄ ← FindClass(S, G)
(1)
(0)
Update all µℓ,i and µℓ,i
Add class c to C
return C

▷ Find class c
▷ Constant time per ℓ and i

2. Cost of SampleUnseenBySize: This function constructs a set S of size ℓ element-by-element. The while loop runs
at most ℓ ≤ d times. In every iteration, it calls CountSeen twice to calculate Nin and Nout .
Tsample (k) =

ℓ
X

2 · Tcount (k)

j=1

= O(d · (k · d)) = O(kd2 ).
3. Total Cost of ClassSampler: The main algorithm runs for m iterations.
SampleUnseenBySize, performs a graph lookup (FindClass), and updates weights.

(10)
In iteration k, it calls

The function FindClass runs in O(d + e) time where e is the number of edges in the graph. Since e ≤ d2 , the dominant
cost remains the combinatorial counting step. The update of µ values takes O(d2 ) but is repeated only m times.
Summing over m iterations:
Ttotal =
=

m
X
k=1
m
X

Tsample (k) + O(d2 )



O(kd2 )

k=1

= O(d2 )

m
X

k ≈ O(d2 m2 ).

k=1

Thus, the total complexity is quadratic in both the dimension and the sample budget.

18

(11)

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 7 SampleUnseenBySize
Input: Size ℓ, Initial set S (i.e., {i} or ∅), seen classes C
Output: A set S of size ℓ sampled uniformly from unseen sets
R ← [d] \ S
C ′ ← {c : |S| ≤ ℓ ≤ |S̄|}
while |S| < ℓ do
Pick j uniformly from R
▷ Completions in seen classes with and without j
Nin , Cin′ ← CountSeen(ℓ, S ∪ {j}, R \ {j}, C ′ )
′
Nout , Cout
← CountSeen(ℓ, S, R \ {j}, C ′ )
▷ Calculate count
 of unseen completions
|R|−1
Uin ← ℓ−|S|−1 − Nin

Uout ← |R|−1
− Nout
ℓ−|S|
▷ Pick j proportional to
 unseen completions
in
Sample b ∼ Bernoulli UinU+U
out

▷ Available candidates
▷ Relevant classes

′
C ′ ← Cout
if b = 1 then
C ′ ← Cin′
S ← S ∪ {j}
R ← R \ {j}
return S

Algorithm 8 CountSeen
Input: Size ℓ, current set S, remaining set R, seen classes C
Output: Number of completions N , applicable classes C ′
N ←0
C′ ← ∅
for class c ∈ C do
Let S be the basis and S̄ be the closure of c
▷ Check if S and R are consistent with class
if S ̸⊆ (S ∪ R) or S ̸⊆ S̄ then continue
Add c to C ′
▷ Calculate available optional elements in this class
noptions ← |R ∩ (S̄ \ S)|
▷ Calculate available, optional spaces
nspaces ← ℓ − |S| − |R ∩ S|
N ← N + nnoptions
spaces
return N

19

▷ Initialize applicable classes

▷ Applicable class

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

E. Identifiability Criterion
In this section, we operate exclusively with non-parametric identifiability, following (Pearl, 2009) (Definition 3.2.4), where
an interventional causal query Q[M ], defined on a causal model M with DAG G = (V ∪ U, E) with V measured nodes
and U latent nodes, is (non-parametrically) identifiable from G if the query can be computed uniquely from any positive
probability of the observed variables Markov-relative2 to the graph. In other words, if two causal models M1 and M2
with positive probability distributions PM1 and PM2 are both Markov-relative to G and observationally identical to each
other (PM1 (V ) = PM2 (V )), then both models must have the same value for the given query. Note that this definition
does not include any assumptions about the functional forms of the causal models nor the probability distributions of the
unobserved variables. In other words, non-parametric identifiability cannot assume anything other than the shape of the
graph G (including latent confounders).
U
X

Y

Figure 7. Bow-arc graph, with non-identifiable PX (Y ).

Non-identifiable example. Consider the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) G = ({X, Y } ∪ {U }, E) in Figure 7, where U
is an unmeasured variable acting as a latent confounder between X and Y . In this graph, PX (Y ) is not identifiable. Let us
demonstrate by creating two equivalent positive distributions P 1 and P 2 Markov-relative to G, with different intervened
distributions for PX (Y ). We define two latent variables: U , the latent confounder between X and Y , and EY , the exogenous
noise variable for Y , both with the same distribution in both models, N (0, 1). In terms of their functional assignments,
1
2
x := fX
(u) = fX
(u) = u, while y := fY1 (x, u, ey ) = x − u + ey and y := fY2 (x, u, ey ) = x · 0 + ey . Note that
1
all distributions P (X), P 2 (X), P 1 (Y | X), P 2 (Y | X) are identical, N (0, 1), and so is P 1 (X, Y ) = P 1 (X)P 1 (Y |
X) = P 2 (X)P 2 (Y | X) = P 2 (X, Y ), and they are positive. However, P 1 (Y | do(X = 0)) ∼ N (0, 2) while
P 2 (Y | do(X = 0)) ∼ N (0, 1). Therefore, PX (Y ) is not identifiable.
Non-parametric identifiability can be demonstrated if we can find an estimand of the causal query only containing
observational terms. In particular, the ID algorithm (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006), described in Section E.1 and presented in
simplified form in Algorithm 9, determines non-parametric identifiability w.r.t. a causal graph G of any non-conditional,
interventional query PX (Y ), for any disjoint subsets of variables X, Y .
Note that any coalition value ν(S) = E[Y | do(S = s)] is non-parametrically identifiable if, and only if, PS (Y ) is
non-parametrically identifiable. Trivially, identifiability in the probability terms guarantees identifiability in the expectation
(since the expectation’s summation or integral is an observational estimand only consisting of identifiable terms Ps (y)).
Conversely, non-identifiability in the terms PS (Y ) must imply non-identifiability for the expectation in the absence of
further parametrical assumptions (e.g., assuming that Ps (y) = Ps (−y), in which case the terms cancel each other out and
make the expectation identifiable). For this reason, we will focus on non-parametric identifiability, and only on queries of
the form PS (Y )—which can be determined thanks to the ID algorithm—as a proxy for identifiability of ν(S).
E.1. The ID algorithm
Let us provide the necessary background definitions and properties to understand the ID algorithm and follow the proofs of
our identifiability criterion.
Definition E.1. Let G = (V ∪ U, E) be a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) with nodes V ∪ U (measured and latent nodes,
respectively) and edges E. Its latent projection is an Acyclic Directed Mixed Graph (ADMG) G∗ = (V, E ∗ ), which is a
graph containing directed and bidirected edges and no directed cycles. In particular, G∗ only contains the measured nodes in
G and: (1) any directed edge in G between measured nodes; (2) an edge between measured nodes if both are connected in G
by a directed path where all intermediate nodes are in U ; and (3) a bidirected edge Vi ↔ Vj between measured nodes if both
are connected by a path of the form Vi ← · · · ← · → · · · → Vj where all intermediate nodes are in U .
2

A probability distribution is Markov-relative to a DAG G = (V ∪ U, E) if P (V, U ) =
is the set of parents of X in G.

20

Q

X∈V ∪U P (X | P aG (X)), where P aG (X)

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Algorithm 9 ID(T, S, G)
Input: Disjoint sets T, S ⊆ V, ADMG G = (V, E).
Output: Boolean indicating whether PS (T ) is identifiable.
1: If S = ∅, return TRUE.
2: If V ̸= AnG (T ), return ID(T, S ∩ AnG (T ), G[AnG (T )]).
3: Let W := (V \ S) \ AnGS (T ). If W ̸= ∅, return ID(T, S ∪ W, G).
4: If V \ S ̸∈ C(G[V \ S]), return ∧Ci ∈C(G[V\S]) ID(Ci , V \ Ci , G).
5: If V ∈ C(G), return FALSE.
6: If V \ S ∈ C(G), return TRUE.
7: Let C ∈ C(G) s.t. C ⊃ V \ S, return ID(T, S ∩ C, G[C]).

In the following, when talking about a graph, we refer to the ADMG latent projection of the DAG under study.
Notation. Let G be an ADMG. We denote by V (G) the set of nodes of G. We denote by G[S] the induced subgraph of
G filtering to the nodes S ⊆ V (G) and only preserving those edges connecting preserved nodes. For a node Y ∈ V (G),
we denote by AnG (Y ) the set of (directed) ancestors of node Y in G including Y , and by DeG (Y ) the set of (directed)
descendants S
of node Y in G including Y . We overload the notation with the ancestors of a set of nodes T ⊆ V (G),
AnG (T ) := t∈T AnG (t), and equivalently for DeG (T ). We denote the intervened graph GS as the subgraph of G such
that any incoming edge to the nodes in S is removed. For this reason, in this section, we will avoid denoting the closure of a
coalition S by S to avoid ambiguity.
Definition E.2. The root set R of an ADMG G is the set of nodes in G with no proper descendants: R := {X ∈ V (G) |
DeG (X) = {X}}.
Definition E.3. Let G be an ADMG. We say that a set of nodes V is a C-component within an ADMG G if all nodes
are connected via bidirected arcs. We denote the set of maximal C-components of a graph G by C(G). In particular, C(G)
constitutes a partition of V (G). We also say G is a C-component when V (G) is a C-component in G.
Definition E.4. We say an ADMG G is an R-rooted C-forest if R is its root set, G is a C-component, and all its nodes have
at most one (directed) child.
Definition E.5. Let G be an ADMG, and S, T disjoint subsets of variables in V (G). We say a pair (F, F ′ ) is an Rrooted hedge for PS (T ) if both F and F ′ are R-rooted C-forests such that F ′ ⊆ F ⊆ G, F ∩ S ̸= ∅, F ′ ∩ S = ∅ and
R ⊆ AnGS (T ).
Hedges are the reason for non-identifiability of causal effects. See the following theorem from (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006)
(Theorem 4).
Theorem E.6. If (F, F ′ ) is a hedge for PS (T ) in an ADMG G, PS (T ) is not identifiable in G.
We are now ready to study the ID algorithm (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006), with which we can ascertain the identifiability of any
query PS (T ). We present a simplified version in Algorithm 9.
E.2. Identifiability criterion
When evaluating do-SHAP, one must evaluate causal queries ν(S) := E[Y | do(S = s)] for multiple coalitions S ⊆ [d]. If
one such query is not identifiable, we cannot continue evaluating do-SHAP and must raise an error. However, this forces
practitioners to execute do-SHAP without knowing if an estimate can be raised, while also running the ID algorithm for
every single coalition that must be evaluated.
Instead, we present the following result, which allows us to determine the identifiability of all 2d coalition values ν(S) just
by determining the identifiability of the d singleton coalitions {i} ⊆ [d].
Theorem E.7. Let G be an ADMG over V, with a single Y ∈ V target node. If ∃X ⊆ V \ {Y } such that PX (Y ) is not
identifiable, then ∃s ∈ X ∪ (V \ AnGX (Y )) such that P{s} (Y ) is not identifiable.
We will devote the remainder of this section to proving this theorem. Let us first prove a set of lemmas that will progressively
build towards the proof.
21

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Lemma E.8. Let G be an ADMG over V, with a set Y ⊆ V the target nodes. If ∃X ⊆ V \ Y such that PX (Y ) is not
identifiable, then the ID algorithm ends at line 5 in a recursive call ID(T, S, G′ ) for S and T non-empty disjoint subsets of
V ′ ⊆ V, and G′ an induced subgraph G′ = G[V ′ ] ⊆ G. Then, there exists R-rooted C-forests (F, F ′ ), R ⊆ V ′ such that
they constitute a hedge for PS (T ).
Proof. Firstly, the ID algorithm (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006) always terminates (Lemma 3 in their paper), it is sound (Theorem 5)
and complete (Corollary 2). Since we assume that PX (Y ) is not identifiable, it must be that when we evaluate ID(Y, X, G),
we will eventually return FALSE from line 5 at a certain recursion level ID(T, S, G′ ). Both X and S must be non-empty
(otherwise line 1 would have returned TRUE). Both S and T must be subsets of V and disjoint (since all recursive
calls maintain them being disjoint given the initial assumption that Y ∩ X = ∅). Finally, G′ is an induced subgraph
G′ = G[V ′ ] ⊆ G, since all recursive calls will at most remove nodes from G.
Let R be the root set of G′ [V ′ \ S]. In particular, R ∩ S = ∅. Let F ′ be an edge subgraph of G′ [V ′ \ S] such that its root set
remains R but all observable nodes have at most one child, and all confounding arcs in G′ [V ′ \ S] are present. Note that
G′ [V ′ \ S] is a C-component (otherwise, line 4 would have triggered) and in creating F ′ we did not remove any confounding
arcs, so F ′ is also a C-component, and therefore an R-rooted C-forest. Now, let us define an edge subgraph F ⊆ G′ by
starting from F ′ , adding all nodes in S and, for every such node adding only one edge to one of its children in G′ , as well
as all bidirected edges. Since every new node has a child in V (F ), the root set remains R, and F is an R-rooted C-forest
by the same reasoning as before because line 5 guarantees C(G′ ) = {V ′ }. Additionally, F ′ ⊆ F , V (F ′ ) ∩ S = ∅ and
V (F ) ∩ S = S ̸= ∅. All that remains is to prove that R ⊆ AnG′ (T ). First, note that R ⊆ AnG′ (T ) by line 2, so there
S
exist paths from nodes r ∈ R to nodes t ∈ T . Let us assume that one such r has all its directed paths blocked by S. Then,
r ̸∈ AnGS (T ) and r ̸∈ S (because R ∩ S = ∅), which means that W in line 3 would have contained r. By contradiction,
R ⊆ AnG′ (T ) and, finally, (F, F ′ ) is a hedge for PS (T ) in G′ .
S

We now define some notation that will guide the proofs that follow. Let G be an ADMG over V, with a single target node
Y ∈ V. If ∃X ⊆ V \ {Y } such that PX (Y ) is not identifiable, let us focus on a single call-path returning FALSE, and
denote the i-deep call ID(T i , S i , Gi ) (with corresponding V i := V (Gi )) along the call-path, starting on ID({Y }, X, G)
(with {Y } = T 0 , X = S 0 , G = G0 ) and ending at depth d ≥ 0 in line 5 for the found hedge. Whenever line 4 or 7 are
called at depth i, let us denote by C i the C-component that appears either: in line 4, for the recursive call to ID in the
particular branch following the call-path, or the one in line 7 that filters S. Let d′ be the first depth level at which line 4 is
triggered or d + 1 if it never does.
Lemma E.9. If line 7 triggers at ID(T i , S i , Gi ), then V i \ S i ⊊ C i ⊊ V i . In particular, S i+1 ⊊ S i .
Proof. V i \ S i ⊂ C i ⊂ V i and it is a maximal C-component in Gi by construction. If C i = V i \ S i , then V i \ S i ∈ C(Gi )
and line 6 would have triggered. If C i = V i , then V i ∈ C(G) and line 5 would have triggered. Finally, since C i ̸= V i and
C i ⊋ V i \ S i , then S i ∩ C ⊊ S i .
Lemma E.10. Some observations that will become relevant throughout the following discussion are:
• Line 1 never triggers along the failing call-path, and ∀i ≤ d, S i ̸= ∅; otherwise, the call-path would not end at line 5.
• Line 6 never triggers along the failing call-path; otherwise, the call-path would not end at line 5.
• Line 5 does not trigger along the failing call-path for depths i < d.
• G can only have nodes removed: Gi+1 ⊆ Gi , ∀i < d.
• We can only remove nodes from the local set of intervened variables S on lines 2 and 7, while also removing them from
the local graph G.
• We can only add nodes to the local set of intervened variables S on lines 3 and 4, while also removing them from the
set of unused nodes U := V \ (T ∪ S).
• The set of unused nodes can never grow: U i+1 ⊆ U i , ∀0 ≤ i < d.
• T does not change until line 4 is called: ∀i ≤ d′ , T i = {Y }.
22

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Lemma E.11. Under the previous assumptions, line 4 can trigger at most once.
′

Proof. Assuming that line 4 triggers at least once, let d′ < d be the depth of its first call, and C d the C-component
′
′
′
′
′
′
whose recursive call we follow along the call-path. Right after that, T d +1 = C d , S d +1 = V d \ C d , and U d +1 =
′
′
′
V d +1 \ (T d +1 ∪ S d +1 ) = ∅. Assume there is a minimal d′′ > d′ in which line 4 triggers again. Then, since only line
′′
′
′
′′
′′
′′
′
′′
4 can change T , T d = T d +1 = C d . Note that V d \ S d = T d = C d (otherwise U d would increase). Therefore,
′′
′′
′′
′′
′
′
′
′
′′
′
′
C(Gd [V d \ S d ]) = C(Gd [C d ]) = C(Gd [C d ]) = {C d } since Gd ⊆ Gd and C d is a maximal C-component in
′
′
′
′
′
′
Gd [V d \ S d ] ⊋ Gd [C d ], which means that line 4 cannot trigger again. In particular, T i = C d , ∀i : d′ < i ≤ d.
Lemma E.12. Under the previous assumptions, if V = AnG (Y ) and X is closed (i.e., X = X ∪ (V \ AnGX (Y ))), then
line 3 never triggers.
Proof. By the fact that the closure of a closed set is itself, line 3 cannot trigger at depth 0. Let us prove the statement by
induction.
Firstly, consider a depth i, 0 < i < d′ , in which line 3 is triggered, while assuming it has not been triggered before.
From Lemma E.10, T i = {Y }. For depth i, it must be that W i := (V i \ S i ) \ AnGi (Y ) ̸= ∅, with nodes w ̸∈ S i and
Si

w ̸∈ AnGi (Y ), but w ∈ AnGi (Y ) (since we skip line 2 to trigger 3), so there are directed paths from w to Y , all blocked
Si

by S i . Let us now study depth i − 1. Since w ̸∈ S i and S i−1 ⊇ S i , if w ∈ S i−1 it must have been removed by lines
2 or 7, but that would also remove it from V i , which is not the case, so we know that w ̸∈ S i−1 . Additionally, if we
assumed that w ̸∈ AnGi−1 (Y ), since w ̸∈ S i , then w ∈ W i−1 but because line 3 did not trigger at depth i − 1, W i−1 = ∅.
S i−1

Consequently, w ∈ AnGi−1 (Y ) and w ̸∈ S i−1 , so there are directed paths from w to Y unblocked by S i−1 , going through
S i−1

nodes in a set Z ⊆ V i−1 \ S i−1 , which all must have disappeared from Gi to make it so w ̸∈ AnGi (Y ). Since line 2
Si

preserves all directed paths to Y , this can only happen if line 7 was triggered at depth i − 1. However, this cannot be the
case either: the C-component C i−1 ⊋ V i−1 \ S i−1 preserves all non-intervened nodes, which is the case for Z. Therefore,
it must be that our initial assumption was false, W i is empty, and so line 3 was not triggered at depth i < d′ after all.
′

′

′

For depth d′ , we naturally skip line 3 to reach line 4. Afterwards, V d +1 = T d +1 ⊔ S d +1 so ∀d′ < i ≤ d, U i :=
V i \ (T i ∪ S i ) = ∅ (Lemma E.10), so W i = ∅, and line 3 is never called either.
Lemma E.13. Let G be an ADMG over V, with a single Y ∈ V target node. If ∃X ⊆ V \ {Y } such that PX (Y ) is
not identifiable, let ID(T d , S d , Gd ) be the last call resulting in the hedge given by Lemma E.8. Then S d ∩ (X ∪ (V \
AnGX (Y ))) ̸= ∅.
Proof. Let X ′ be the closure of X, X ′ := X ∪ (V \ AnGX (Y )) (here denoted X ′ instead of X to avoid ambiguity of
notation), and let us prove that S d ∩ X ′ ̸= ∅. Note that if line 2 or 3 trigger on the first calls, we end up in a recursive call
ID({Y }, S i , Gi ) where V i = AnG (Y ) and S i = AnG (Y ) ∩ (X ∪ (V \ AnGX (Y ))), so we can assume without loss of
generality that V = AnG (Y ) and X ′ = X at the start of the call-path. Consequently, S 0 ∩ X ′ = X ′ ̸= ∅ trivially. Let us
proceed by induction, proving that ∀i < d, S i ∩ X ′ ̸= ∅ implies that S i+1 ∩ X ′ ̸= ∅, and then so will be the case for S d ,
which will prove the lemma.
Let us now consider any depth level 0 < i ≤ min(d, d′ ) and assume that S i−1 ⊆ X ′ . Let us study what happens
at depth i − 1. Lines 1, 3, 4, and 6 cannot trigger (by Lemmas E.10 and E.12 and the fact that i ≤ d′ ). If line 2
were to remove any nodes, it would still result in a non-empty proper subset S i ⊊ S i−1 ⊆ X ′ . If line 7 triggered,
S i := S i−1 ∩ C i−1 ⊊ S i−1 ⊆ X ′ and S i ̸= ∅ by Lemma E.9. In all cases, the next recursive S is not empty and only
contains nodes in X ′ : ∅ ̸= S i+1 ⊊ S i ⊆ X ′ .
′

If line 4 never triggers, we have already proved the result. Otherwise, d′ < d, and C d is the C-component whose recursive
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
call we follow along the call-path. In particular, V d +1 = V d , T d +1 = C d , S d +1 = V d \ C d ⊋ S d , so it contains
′
′
elements of X ′ and outside X ′ (because the nodes in X ′ \ S d have been removed from Gd as well). Additionally,
∀i > d′ , U i = ∅, and can never increase.
′

′

′

For d′ ≤ i ≤ d, let us define S i = Ai ⊔ B i ̸= ∅, with Ai := S i ∩ X ′ and B i := S i \ X ′ . Note that Ad = S d , B d = ∅, and
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
′
Ad +1 = S d , B d +1 = (V d \C d )\Ad ̸= ∅, since S d +1 = V d \C d ⊋ S d ⊆ X ′ . Additionally, ∀i > d′ +1, Ai ⊆ Ai−1
23

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

and B i ⊆ B i−1 since we can only remove nodes at this point, given that line 3 and line 4 will not run again (Lemmas E.12
and E.11). Let us prove that if ∀i : d′ < i < d, Ai ̸= ∅, then Ai+1 ̸= ∅, for which we must check lines 2 and 7.
If line 2 was triggered at step i and Ai+1 = ∅, the next recursion level would have T i+1 = T i , S i+1 = B i+1 ̸= ∅ and
Gi+1 = Gi [AnGi (T i )] ⊆ Gi . At level i + 1, line 6 would trigger: neither line 3 nor line 4 can trigger again; if we
′
′
assume that line 5 triggers, then V i+1 ∈ C(Gi+1 ), but B i+1 ⊆ B d +1 and no node in B d +1 belonged in the same maximal
′
d′
d′
d′
d′
i+1
d′
C-component as C in G [V \ A ], then all bidirected paths from B
to C were blocked by Ad , and now that
i+1
i+1
i+1
i+1
d′
A
= ∅, these paths are cut; finally, for line 6, if V
\S
=T
= C were not a maximal C-component of the
induced subgraph Gi+1 = Gi [AnGi (T i )], it must be that a node b ∈ S i+1 = B i+1 is connected through a bidirected path
′
to C d in this graph, which we have just proved to be false, hence proving that the call would return TRUE at line 6. By
′
contradiction, this proves that line 2 would have not removed all of Ad +1 ⊆ X ′ .
′

Finally, if line 7 was triggered at step i and Ai+1 = ∅, when before it was not, necessarily B i+1 ̸= ∅, and ∀c ∈ T i = C d ,
′
′
∀b ∈ B i+1 = B i ∩ C i , there are bidirected paths connecting c and b in Gi ⊋ Gi+1 , and all are intersected by S d = Ad
′
(otherwise b ∈ C d ). Consequently, either these intersecting nodes are in Ai , in which case they would not have been
removed from Ai+1 , or they are not in Ai , in which case b would have been removed as well for its paths would be cut.
Both cases contradict the assumption that Ai+1 = ∅.
Bringing everything together and by induction, ∅ ⊊ Ad ⊆ X ′ , proving the lemma.
We now have all we need to prove the theorem.
Proof of Theorem E.7. Finally, let us finish the proof by showing that if (F, F ′ ) is the R-rooted hedge for PS (T ) found at
the end of the call-stack, ∀s ∈ S ∩ X ′ , with X ′ := X ∪ (V \ AnGX (Y )) the closure of X, then (F, F ′ ) is also a hedge
for P{s} (Y ). Note that the hedge still fulfills the conditions F ′ ⊆ F, F ∩ {s} ̸= ∅, F ′ ∩ {s} = ∅, both R-rooted, both
C-forests. So now we only need to check that R ⊆ AnGs (Y ), but if one such r ∈ R were not in AnGs (Y ) ⊇ AnGX ′ (Y ),
then r would belong in X ′ by definition of the closure of X and the fact that the closure of a closure is itself. Additionally,
throughout the call-stack, r would have never left the set of intervened nodes without leaving the graph itself, hence r ∈ S,
contradicting the fact that S ∩ R = ∅ by construction (see Lemma E.8). Therefore, it must be that R ⊆ AnGs (Y ), proving
that (F, F ′ ) is a hedge for P{s} (Y ). By Theorem 4 in (Shpitser & Pearl, 2006), P{s} (Y ) is not identifiable.
Corollary E.14. Any do-Shapley value ϕi for i ∈ [d] is (non-parametrically) identifiable if, and only if, all singleton
coalition probabilities (P{k} (Y ))k∈[d] are (non-parametrically) identifiable.
Proof. If all singleton coalitions {k} ⊆ [d] have identifiable probability terms P{k} (Y ), there cannot be any coalition
S ⊆ [d] for which PS (Y ) is not identifiable (otherwise, by Theorem E.7, ∀k ∈ S ∪ (V \ AnGS (Y )), P{k}P
(Y ) would not be
r
identifiable). Then, all the respective ν(S) = E[Y | do(S = s)] are identifiable, and consequently, ϕi = j=1 ν(cj )wi (cj )
is also identifiable. Conversely, if one such P{k} (Y ) were not identifiable, its ν({k}) term cannot be either, nor can ϕk .

24

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

F. Extensions of the Shapley value
The Shapley value was extended in multiple ways. Semivalues (Dubey et al., 1981) , such as the Banzhaf value (Banzhaf III,
1964), extend the Shapley values to alternative weighting schemes (qs )s=0,...,n−1 ≥ 0 as
X
ϕqi =
[ν(S ∪ i) − ν(S)]q|S| .
(12)
S⊆[d]\i

If q is a probability distribution over 2[d] , then they are also referred to as cardinal-probabilistic values (Fujimoto et al.,
2006). By replacing the weights in Equation (4), we can derive an efficient computation for any semivalue.
Another line of work extends the Shapley value to higher-order interactions, known as the Shapley interaction index
(Grabisch & Roubens, 1999), and defined by
X
X
|U |
ϕU =
∆U (S)p|S| with ∆U (S) :=
(−1)|U |−|S| ν(S ∪ L),
L⊆U

S⊆[d]\U

1
and pus := (d−u+1)·
. The discrete derivative ∆U (S) thereby measures the interaction of U in the presence of S, and
(d−u
s )
directly extends the marginal contribution. We now utilize a result by Zern et al. (2023b)[Proposition 1] to efficiently
compute the Shapley interaction index for value functions of the shape 1[S ⊆ S ⊆ S].

Proposition F.1 (Zern et al. (2023a)). Given subsets S ⊆ S ⊆ [d] and value function ν(S) = 1[S ⊆ S ⊆ S], the Shapley

a+b −1
1
interaction index is given by the weights ωa,b := a+b+1
and
a
ϕU = (−1)|U ∩([d]\S)| ω|S|−|S∩U |,|[d]\(S∪U )| ,
if U ⊆ A ∪ ([d] \ B), and ϕU = 0 otherwise.
Notably, the weights ω can be precomputed. Consequently, we obtain the following result by the linearity of the Shapley
interaction index (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999).
Proposition F.2. The do-Shapley interaction index is given by
ϕU =

r
X

ν(cj )(−1)|U ∩([d]\S j )| ω|S |−|S j ∩U |,|[d]\(S j ∪U )| .
j

j=1

Proof. We define νj (S) := 1[S j ⊆ S ⊆ S j ] for each irreducible set from j = 1, . . . , r. Furthermore, we denote ϕU [ν] as
the Shapley interaction index with respect to ν. Then, by linearity (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999) of ϕU , we obtain
ϕU [ν] = ϕU [

r
X

ν(cj ) · 1[S j ⊆ S ⊆ S j ]] =

j=1

r
X

ν(cj )ϕU [νj ] =

j=1

r
X

ν(cj )(−1)|U ∩([d]\S j )| ω|S |−|S j ∩U |,|[d]\(S j ∪U )| .
j

j=1

With the efficient computation of the Shapley interaction index (Grabisch & Roubens, 1999), we can directly extract the
n-Shapley values (Lundberg et al., 2018a; Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023) using the following recursion:

ΦnU :=


ϕU
n−1
ΦU + Bd−|U |

P

K⊆[d]\U ϕU ∪K

if |U | = n,
if |U | < n,

|K|+|S|=n

with Φ1i := ϕi for all i ∈ [d]. The n-Shapley values have first been introduced by Lundberg et al. (2018b), and were later
genearlized to arbitrary order n (Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023). Importantly, they satisfy the generalized efficiency axiom for
Shapley interactions (Bordt & von Luxburg, 2023), i.e.
X
ΦnU = ν([d]),
U ⊆[d]:|U |≤n

25

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

where we defined Φ0∅ := ν(∅).
do-Shapley Interactions for SCMs. Generalizations of the Shapley value to higher-order interactions provide a principled
framework for explanations with varying degrees of granularity and expressivity. To illustrate this for do-Shapley values and
their interaction-based extensions, we compute Shapley interactions using shapiq (Muschalik et al., 2024a) for SCMs
derived from four datasets from the TALENT benchmark (Liu et al., 2025). Following Section 6, the SCMs are learned
from data using GRaSP (Lam et al., 2022), with the corresponding variables described in Tables 1 to 4. The resulting
do-Shapley interactions are visualized in Figures 8 to 11. First-order explanations recover the standard do-Shapley values,
while the highest-order interactions correspond to the Möbius transform of the value function. We present the shapiq
explanations as overlays on the learned SCMs, where node sizes represent main effects and edge or hyperedge widths encode
interaction strength. The color indicates the direction of the effects (blue denotes a negative interaction and red a positive
interaction). While first-order do-Shapley values summarize aggregated causal effects of individual features, increasing
the interaction order yields progressively finer-grained insights into the causal structure. At the same time, the growing
number of interaction terms poses interpretability challenges, motivating application-specific post-processing and selection
of relevant interaction orders.

X6

X2

X8

X6

X3

X2
X5

X4

X7

X2
X5

X4

SCM

X6

X3

Y

X1

X8

X7

X2
X5

X4

do-Shapley Values
(order 1)

X6

X3

Y

X1

X8

X7

X3

Y

X5

X1

X4

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 2)

X8

X7

Y

X1

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 8)

Figure 8. do-Shapley values and interactions for B RAZILIAN HOUSES REPRODUCED of increasing order (feature names in Table 1). The
size of the nodes and edges (hyperedges) denotes the strength of the effect. The color denotes the direction (blue negative, red positive).

X4

X7

X4

X3
Y

Y

X4

Y

X1

Y

X6

X6
X5

X5

X5
X2

X2

do-Shapley Values
(order 1)

X7

X3

X1

X6

X5

X7

X3

X1

X6

SCM

X4

X3

X1

X2

X7

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 2)

X2

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 7)

Figure 9. do-Shapley values and interactions for FOREX AUDJPY- HOUR -H IGH of increasing order (feature names in Table 4). The size
of the nodes and edges (hyperedges) denotes the strength of the effect. The color denotes the direction (blue negative, red positive).

26

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

X1

X1

X3

X4

X5

X3

Y

X4

X5

X3

Y

SCM

X4

X5

do-Shapley Values
(order 1)

X3

Y

X2

X2

X2

X1

X1

X4

X5

Y

X2

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 2)

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 5)

Figure 10. do-Shapley values and interactions for L APTOP P RICES DATASET of increasing order (feature names in Table 3). The size of
the nodes and edges (hyperedges) denotes the strength of the effect. The color denotes the direction (blue negative, red positive).

X2

X2

X4
X5

X1

X4

X2
X5

Y

X4

Y

X3

X1

SCM

do-Shapley Values
(order 1)

X2
X5

X3

X1

X4

Y

X3

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 2)

X5
X1

Y

X3

do-Shapley Interactions
(order 5)

Figure 11. do-Shapley values and interactions for Y EAST of increasing order (feature names in Table 2). The size of the nodes and edges
(hyperedges) denotes the strength of the effect. The color denotes the direction (blue negative, red positive).

Node

Feature Name

X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8

hoa (BRL)
fire insurance (BRL)
parking spaces
rent amount (BRL)
rooms
property tax (BRL)
target
bathroom

Y

area

Table 1. Variables for B RAZILIAN HOUSES REPRODUCED: d = 8 input features and 9 nodes in total (including target Y ).

Node

Feature Name

X1
X2
X3
X4
X5

alm
nuc
vac
gvh
mcg

Y

mit

Table 2. Variables for YEAST: d = 5 input features and 6 nodes in total (including target Y ).

27

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Node

Feature Name

X1
X2
X3
X4
X5

N0
N1
N5
target
N4

Y

N2

Table 3. Variables for L APTOP P RICES DATASET: d = 5 input features and 6 nodes in total (including target Y ).

Node

Feature Name

X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7

Ask Low
Bid Low
Bid Close
Ask Open
Ask Close
Bid Open
Ask High

Y

Bid High

Table 4. Variables for FOREX AUDJPY- HOUR -H IGH: d = 7 input features and 8 nodes in total (including target Y ).

28

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

G. Additional Experiments

Estimator Convergence (Aggregated)

10 0

Relative MSE

10 −1
10 −2
10 −3
10 −4
10 −5

Method
doRegressionMSR
doLeverageSHAP
RegressionMSR
LeverageSHAP
Budget = r

10 −6

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Budget Ratio m/r

1.0

Figure 12. Estimator Convergence (Aggregated), Clipped View. The Relative Mean Squared Error (MSE) of Shapley value estimates
versus the budget ratio m/r, aggregated across all datasets. This is the same plot as Figure 5, but where we have adjusted the view to
more clearly show the distinctions in estimator performance for when m/r ≤ 1.

Computation Cost vs. Budget
Computation Time (s)

Method

10 0

doRegressionMSR
doLeverageSHAP
RegressionMSR
LeverageSHAP
Budget = r

10 −1

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

Budget Ratio m/r

1.50

1.75

2.00

Figure 13. Computational Cost. Average wall-clock time (seconds) versus budget ratio (m/r). The structure-aware estimators (i.e.
“do”-variants) incur a consistent runtime overhead compared to their structure-agnostic counterparts. This additional cost represents the
time required for graph traversal and boundary sampling to identify distinct equivalence classes. The more computationally demanding
structural exploration is the necessary trade-off to achieve the orders-of-magnitude reduction in estimation error seen in e.g. Figure 5.

29

Exactly Computing do-Shapley Values

Table 5. Relative MSE statistics by budget ratio (m/r).
Metric

LeverageSHAP

Mean
Median
Q1 (25%)
Q2 (50%)
Q3 (75%)
Q4 (Max)

1.5e-1
8.2e-3
8.5e-4
8.2e-3
2.2e-1
2.5e+00

Mean
Median
Q1 (25%)
Q2 (50%)
Q3 (75%)
Q4 (Max)

5.8e-2
1.9e-3
2.0e-4
1.9e-3
1.3e-2
1.2e+00

Mean
Median
Q1 (25%)
Q2 (50%)
Q3 (75%)
Q4 (Max)

1.8e-2
4.8e-4
7.7e-5
4.8e-4
2.5e-3
6.6e-1

Mean
Median
Q1 (25%)
Q2 (50%)
Q3 (75%)
Q4 (Max)

6.2e-3
2.4e-4
2.8e-5
2.4e-4
1.2e-3
3.3e-1

doLeverageSHAP

RegressionMSR

doRegressionMSR

Budget Ratio m/r = 0.25
1.2e-1
9.8e-3
4.1e-4
9.8e-3
5.9e-2
5.6e+00

3.5e-1
7.9e-3
1.5e-4
7.9e-3
3.0e-1
2.4e+00

6.0e-2
3.8e-4
8.1e-8
3.8e-4
1.1e-2
1.2e+00

Budget Ratio m/r = 0.5
6.8e-2
4.8e-3
1.4e-4
4.8e-3
1.9e-2
5.6e+00

1.4e-1
8.8e-4
1.5e-5
8.8e-4
9.7e-3
2.0e+00

2.5e-2
1.1e-5
5.9e-9
1.1e-5
1.4e-3
7.0e-1

Budget Ratio m/r = 0.75
9.1e-3
9.9e-4
2.2e-5
9.9e-4
6.0e-3
3.6e-1

5.5e-2
1.4e-4
2.8e-6
1.4e-4
2.3e-3
2.0e+00

6.1e-3
5.7e-7
3.8e-10
5.7e-7
1.5e-4
3.3e-1

Budget Ratio m/r = 1.0
4.2e-6
4.1e-29
1.1e-30
4.1e-29
6.1e-26
3.7e-4

4.8e-3
4.4e-6
2.0e-7
4.4e-6
5.1e-4
3.0e-1

30

2.0e-5
3.5e-13
2.6e-14
3.5e-13
2.6e-12
3.7e-3

